you
there is a myth that grandmasters can
see 10-15-20 moves ahead and it's a
great myth because I'm a grandmaster and
it makes me look like super freaking
genius but the truth is in just the
first four moves there are 318 billion
ways you could play now that'd be cool
if I could pull that off but
grandmasters just can't it's too much so
we use different techniques to be able
to look ahead and some of these
techniques include chunking which means
taking a group of a chess position and
seeing what possibilities can come from
just that group or pattern-recognition
which is going over a lot of positions
that look very similarly and
extrapolating throughs from that the
stepping stone method which is to take a
position freeze it in your mind and go
from there to guess the next position
but one of my favorites that I love to
solve these kind of chess puzzles is
called retrograde analysis and what you
do with retrograde analysis is that in
order to look ahead it pays to look
backwards now why is this so useful well
in chess it's a very complicated case
you've got all these chess pieces it's
32 pieces but after five moves the
position starts to evolve a little bit
and then the game starts to go on and
you see the chess position get a little
simpler and a little bit simpler and
less pieces on the board until finally
in this case a game that I played in the
tournament in Foxwoods it gets to
something like this when great players
play it often gets to something like
this you don't see like some easy early
checkmate grandmasters see through all
that stuff what you see is some endgame
something really really simple and we
like to studies things like this
grandmasters do so that if we get to
them we know how to play them cold but
also so that we can steer the position
that's in front of us the more complex
ones you saw earlier to something this
easy something this simple so in this
way when you're dead I already knew like
ten moves ago because I knew where we
were going now why is this so effective
something about the human mind the
problem with the human mind we're very
logical creatures so I want you to play
along with me a few games take a look at
this sentence now most of you read in a
sentence the second time around will
realize that you miss the word the the
first time around your mind is very
logical it proceeds forward it just
ignores anything that breaks with this
logical stream and so you don't see the
word the first time the second there the
first time you read it but if you read
this sentence backwards you would
automatically catch it you'd go
backwards and you get to brain you get
the thud then you say whoa there - thus
in the sentence this is a really cool
trick for proofreading papers you know
you're writing a paper and it's like
these silly mistakes why are these
mistakes in my paper you read it
backwards you'll catch all of them
alright let's go on to this problem an
interesting problem bacteria that double
every 24 hours fill a lake it has
infested after precisely 60 days on what
day was the lake half full now a lot of
people seen this problem they think 30
like you know you split it in half well
that's not the right answer and also
people might want to calculate it's too
big it's mass it's boring I don't want
to do that either but if you do this
problem backwards you get the answer
right away what's the answer
59 obviously you start at the end you go
backwards it's like oh yeah it's
half-full
the answer is 59 here's another puzzle a
little bit more complicated you have six
numbers one through six the cards are
face down you and I are going to pick a
card you pick a card and you look at it
it says the number two I look at my card
I think about it for a minute and I say
I want to train the reason I want to
trade we're gonna trade to see who has
the highest number at the end do you
trade with me most people say of course
I got a two - sucks
therefore numbers higher probability
says I'm gonna do better
wrong answer you're playing a
grandmaster you start from the back and
you work it out if I had the number six
would I offer to trade of course not I'm
not dumb what about the number five
probably
either because you're not going to say
yes if you have a six well if five is
not going to trade in six is not going
to trade four is going to be like I'm
not trading either because five and six
is don't trade so you see what happens
is we work backward three is going to
realize four five and six they don't
trade so the offer is definitely a one
and all of you said yes thanks for your
money so this retrograde analysis is
used in different places it's used to
prove intoxications hours after an
alleged DUI by Pennsylvania police
officers which is kind of cool well it
means don't drink and drive the use of
retro analysis used in law science
medicine insurance stock market politics
career planning but I find it's used to
be a more interesting place maybe the
one of the most interesting uses is in
this movie which I know a lot of you
know the Curious Case of Benjamin Button
where Brad Pitt plays a guy who's living
his life backwards and what this movie
makes me think of is that great quote
that well that call you often hear from
people who are older that youth is
wasted on the young
well if you can see the endgame your
youth will not be wasted on you
thank you very much